Difference between JPA, Hibernate and Spring Data JPA

JPA, Hibernate, and Spring Data JPA are technologies used in Java applications to simplify 
database operations. They are related to each other but have different responsibilities.

JPA (Java Persistence API) is a specification provided by Java for managing relational 
data in Java applications. It defines a standard set of rules and interfaces for mapping Java 
objects to database tables and performing database operations. JPA itself does not provide any 
implementation. It only defines how persistence should work. To use JPA, we need an implementation
 provider such as Hibernate. Common JPA annotations include @Entity, @Table, @Id, and @Column, 
 which are used to map Java classes and fields with database tables and columns.

Hibernate is an Object Relational Mapping (ORM) framework and one of the most popular 
implementations of the JPA specification. It provides the actual logic required to interact 
with the database. Hibernate converts Java objects into database records and database records 
back into Java objects. It automatically generates SQL queries, manages database connections, 
handles transactions, and reduces the need to write JDBC code manually. Hibernate allows developers 
to work with objects instead of directly writing SQL queries for every operation.

Spring Data JPA is an abstraction layer built on top of JPA and JPA implementations like Hibernate. 
It simplifies database access by reducing repetitive code. Instead of manually creating DAO classes 
and writing common database operations, Spring Data JPA provides repository interfaces such as 
JpaRepository. By extending these repositories, developers get built-in methods like save(), 
findAll(), findById(), and deleteById() without writing their implementation. It also manages 
transactions and integrates easily with Spring Boot applications.

In a Spring Boot application, Spring Data JPA communicates with JPA, and Hibernate works 
internally as the JPA implementation to perform database operations.

The relationship can be represented as:

Spring Data JPA
        ↓
       JPA
        ↓
    Hibernate
        ↓
     Database

Example:

Using Hibernate directly requires creating sessions, beginning transactions, saving objects, 
committing transactions, and closing sessions manually.

Using Spring Data JPA:

countryRepository.save(country);

is enough to store data because Spring Data JPA internally uses Hibernate to complete the operation.

In simple terms:

JPA defines the rules for object persistence.
Hibernate implements those rules and performs ORM operations.
Spring Data JPA simplifies the usage of JPA and Hibernate by removing boilerplate code 
through repository interfaces.

Therefore, JPA is a specification, Hibernate is the implementation of that specification, 
and Spring Data JPA is a higher-level abstraction that makes database development faster and 
easier in Spring applications.